Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs and
the MG by Doctor Deborah Liberman. She's professor and
has served as Associate chair for undergraduate affairs and
Research in the Department of Psychology at the University
of Miami. She's also the author of Book, objection,
disgust morality and the law. And today we're going
to talk about, uh, from an evolutionary perspective, of
course, about emotions, disgust, gratitude, and emotional tears. So,
Dr. Lieberman, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much. It's great to be here.
So let me start perhaps with a more, with
a broader, more general question. So, from an evolutionary
perspective, how do you approach emotions? What are emotions,
and do you personally, do you approach them as
adaptations or as something else?
That's a great place to start. So, My perspective
on emotions is that they are programs. They are
somehow kind of neurally instantiated algorithms that help guide
behavior. I don't see them as different than cognition,
so oftentimes we hear about emotion versus cognition. But
when you talk about the kinds of problems that
we solve and the information processing structure of, of
the mind, the brain, Uh, somewhere in all of
that emotions are just like other aspects of cognition,
information processing programs, um, but these are well coordinated
to take advantage of elements of, of, you know,
psychology and physiology to coordinate the mind and the
body in a way that would have allowed for
the solving of an adaptive problem. So my approach
to emotions is thinking about. The past environment, uh,
the kinds of problems we would have had to
solve across the entire life stage, both sexes, what
kinds of programs would have somehow offered an advantage
to survival and reproduction. And so that's how I,
that's how I, I typically tend to start, um.
Thinking about What the emotions could be and what
they might look like.
Uh, BUT so they are adaptations in your perspective
or not?
Um, I think, well, I, I try to test
whether they are. Um, THE question is whether there's
any type of evolved, uh, functionality and specialization to
solving a problem. The more evidence that you have
in the direction that something does look very tailored
to solving a particular problem, the more evidence you
have in favor of it being an evolved adaptation.
Um, AND so I think that you're always being
cautious, throwing that term around, but, uh, in general,
I think that the suite of emotions, uh, are,
you know, they, they constitute a suite of adaptations,
but, but trying to understand, uh, what, uh, their,
their components and so forth, that, that's a matter
of, of hypothesis testing.
So when it comes to the functions of emotions,
if I understand it correctly, I think we have
to approach them on a case by case basis
because different emotions sort of uh different functions. But
generally speaking, are there functions that emotions in general
serve? I mean, what do we need the emotions
for?
Uh, SO emotions, I would say are just a
particular type of program that are that's capable of
coordinating the activation, deactivation of a series of other
psychological or physiological components. So what makes an emotion
program my perspective. Uh, AN emotion program is, is
how the extent to which it coordinates across the
entire, you know, system, uh, you know, all human
systems. So when you have a system that's capable
of, um, of regulating memory, attention, Uh, physiology, heart
rate, for instance. I mean, these are things that
require some type of top-level coordination signal, and to
me, emotions are that type of signal that cascade
throughout the mind and body and are capable of
activating, deactivating whatever programs were necessary in order to
solve a particular problem. So I, I just see
emotions as coordinating systems and coordinating devices. So in
that sense, they're just a higher level cognitive program,
if you will, but Um, but in any case,
no, I take them as discrete. Discrete types of
programs. Certainly, they can blend into one another in
terms of what they look like and what they
feel like. But my, the way I at least
approach each emotion is that it's going to have
a particular information processing structure with, with specified and
knowable inputs, ways information gets integrated, and then, you
know, knowable pre predictable outputs. Um. So that's one
way I, I start with it. So emotions to
me are just very interesting complex mental apps. Mhm.
And how do emotions connect to morality? What is
the link there and how is it established?
You've gone there very quickly. Um, AND so I
would say emotions to morality. Um, Uh, WELL, You
want me to bridge an is aught gap in
the first few minutes of our conversation here, so.
Um. I would say that emotions make salient and,
and, and register certain events as being fitness promoting
from uh fitness enhancing, goal fulfilling or goal not
fulfilling, and I think that These outputs of value,
um, that indicate whether or not you prefer to
engage in a particular behavior, associate with particular people,
um, Inform our way of viewing the world as
to what seems right and wrong. So if I
can just say that at the outset and maybe
leave the rest for when we get maybe particularly
to disgust, I can talk a little bit more,
maybe how disgust is involved in that. Certainly not
the only emotion that informs our, our moral sense.
But, uh, if I can give you a general
answer like that for now. Or uh
yeah, of course.
So, uh, so what do you want to jump
into a particular emotion to kind of get at
maybe how um How it might inform morality. I
mean, we have to define what morality is, and
that it might take a little bit longer than
than an hour, but uh but I'll leave it
to you. Do you wanna, do you want to
jump into disgust?
Oh, OK. Is there any way that you could
give us Uh, just a brief definition of morality
then to, then for people to understand then how
the link is established. And then perhaps we can
get into the emotion of these guest, which is
one that you have explored a lot in your
work, so.
Let's do the second part first, and then the
first part after only because defining morality. I don't
know that I have the street cred to do
that, but at least I can talk about social
value, uh, as it pertains to disgust. And so
I can let the, the listeners draw their own
conclusions about what they consider morality to be after
I kind of paint that picture and tell them
what maybe I think is going on here. But
in terms of what, you know, what morality is,
uh, I think that there's There are a lot
of possible ways to, to explore that. Um, I
definitely take a biological approach to understanding, um, morality
and why we feel certain things are right versus
wrong. Uh, YOU change a couple circuits in our
brain, and we would very much feel that different
kinds of behaviors were right versus wrong. And so
the way I like to talk about it, or
at least begin to talk about it is through
the emotion of disgust. So let's maybe get to
discuss first.
OK, let's go into this gust then. So, what
is this, I mean, I have a couple of
questions here. Uh, WHAT is this gust? How has
it evolved since we're tackling things here from the
perspective of evolutionary psychology and what functions does it
serve?
Well, as you know, there's been a lot of
work on Disgust. So I'm far from the first
researcher to, uh, to take a look at the
functions, the evolved functions of Disgust. Paul Rozin, Jonathan
Haidt, and a whole bunch of their colleagues have
done a lot of, uh, great work thinking about
what disgust is. I had worked early on with,
uh, Josh Tiber, and he and I started to
Think about whether the way that uh Rosin and
Height had kind of cut up discussed was the
best way when thinking about evolved function. Certainly they
identified a whole bunch of discussed solicitors. Uh, THE
question is how, how best to account for all
of that. And working with Josh, we initially thought
about disgust as a pathogen role that it serves
a sexual role and then a moral moral role.
And, um, my thinking has evolved a little bit
since then. So, uh, because in some of our
papers we've talked about that kind of, and we
have a scale measuring the three domains of disgust,
pathogens, sexual, and moral. And I don't, I don't
think that, uh, is, is probably far from what's
going on. But since then, Carlton Patrick and I,
who co-auth co-authored the book Objection, um, that you
mentioned at the, at the top. We started to
think about uh disgust, breaking it down a little
bit differently. So, I think disgust evolved to solve
three separate problems. What to eat, what to touch,
and with whom to mate. And so those particular,
you know, the consumption, the contact, and sex are,
I think the three native. Primary functions of disgust.
And the order that that this evolved in, uh,
I think is an interesting question. But in terms
of functionality, it looks like disgust is the output
of a consumption psychology that registers whether or not
any particular piece of matter, any morsel. Uh, IS,
you know, what's the expected fitness value of consuming
anything in the environment at any one time across
the life stage and, and so forth. And so
this is a, a critical problem that our ancestors
and all animals would have had to have solved.
And the question is, what does that programming look
like? And so, As Carlton and I um started
to talk about this, also, Josh Tiber, uh, was
part of this discussion early on as well. We
basically tried to come up with what a system
would look like, and We evaluate morsels of food
based on a bunch of criteria through a bunch
of senses, right? So how much sugar, how much
salt, uh, you know, protein, um, fats, and so
forth. And we have a system that detects their
presence based on cues, so sweetness versus bitterness, uh,
for toxins that we want to tend to avoid.
And it generates, uh, as an output, kind of
this scrumptiousness sense, right? So either something is yucky
and you don't want to eat it versus it's
really scrumptious, and you do want to eat it,
but disgust seems to be on the tail end
of that, on one continuum, on one side of
the. Continuum preventing us from eating things that would
have, would have been harmful. But I should say
that, of course, there's a lot of things and
a lot of input the system has to take,
and it a lot should matter. So not only
the cues of sugar presents, salt presence, Um, you
know, protein and fat and so forth. Those are
the things that we tend to seek out. But
also, we want to make sure that we're not
consuming, uh, in too much, in too much quantities,
toxins and, and, and microorganisms. And so we have,
you know, sour and bitter, which are there in
order to help us detect the presence of plant
toxins, which could have been quite poisonous, and then
microorganisms which can take over our entire system. And
so, in addition to those inputs, though, you have,
you know, developmental inputs. So what stage of developments
are you in? And so plant toxins are particularly,
uh, harmful to young kids. This is why young
kids don't like eating their vegetables, um, because a
lot of the brain growth isn't done yet, and
plant toxins can interrupt a lot of the neurogenesis.
And so there's, there's developmental stage. But then there's
also experience in your priors with any particular food
substance, which should, of course, update and inform whether
or not you're going to eat something again. Um,
ALTHOUGH it doesn't seem to happen with tequila, does
it? Right? So you can drink tequila once and,
you know, get really sick and then suddenly two
months later, you're like, Ah, sounds like a great
idea again. So, for whatever reason, tequila seems to
be an interesting exception to this rule. Um. But
that's neither here nor there right now. And so,
uh, but what, what is interesting also is that
cultural norms should inform the system too, right? So
the idea that you are going to be told,
no matter what society you're born into, what's appropriate,
what's inappropriate to consume, and that should also generate
and uh help regulate the things that you find
repetitive versus aversive. So, the food, just food psychology
is a really complex system. Oh, I should also
mention probably that your health status should update what
you find, uh, yummy to eat as well. So
when you're sick, you tend to seek out plants.
Uh, AND so sometimes the secondary compounds of, of
plants could be adjuvant therapies for, for disease organisms.
A while I had seen and had written about
how even chimps kind of seek out particular plants
and they'll, they'll roll it up, kind of like
dip and just kind of suck on the juices.
They won't eat it, chew it up or eat
it, but they will kind of extract some of
the, the compounds of the plants. Perhaps this was
kind of a, an early stage or early form
of, of medicine. But in any case, A lot
of factors should influence our food psychology, our consumption
psychology, and I think disgust is, is certainly part
of that. Uh, AND then I think touching things,
so contacting things that could have potentially been dangerous
sources or contaminants, uh, is something also disgust regulates,
but then sexual disgust, who you find attractive as
a, as a mate. So the idea that Discussed
as a system is already sensitive to pathogen presence.
It doesn't make it all that, uh, far a
leap to think that, you know, you can up
regulate it or down regulate it. So the idea
that, you know, another person represents an entire different
planet of microorganisms, right? So how, how does sex
even happen if we have a disgust system that's
sensitive to the microorganisms and pathogens of others? Well,
instead, Of up regulating other factors cause disgust to
down regulate in order for sexual attraction to take
hold. Uh, THAT would have been, uh, how disgust
enters into the sexual, uh, sexual psychology. So either
up regulating to prevent someone from being motivated to
seek someone out sexually, or, um, or kind of
having that reduction in disgust. And there's great individual
differences in, in these systems and so forth. So
I think that Uh, it's a very long-winded answer
to your question, what is discussed, but so consumption,
contact, and sex, I would say are, are some
of the, the three main areas, uh, over which
disgust reigns.
OK. So this is a question that I've already
discussed with several different evolutionary psychologists on the show.
Uh, I, I think that, uh, I mean, I
started the show almost 7 years ago, and I've
been discussing this from the very beginning. So I'm
not sure if over time, things have changed when
it comes to this discussion with this, when it
comes to this specific discussion, but is there such
a thing as moral disgust?
It's a good question. Um, I started out thinking
that there was, um, and I will tell you
that the first run through of the book Carlton
and I wrote really reflected three different areas, a
pathogen disgust, a sexual disgust, and a moral disgust.
Um, AND until it came time to write moral
disgust, it seemed really clear to understand consumption and
contact and sex and write out information processing systems,
inputs, how things are integrated, outputs. And when it
comes to moral disgust, it was just a big
old question mark, like, what, how, where, who? Like,
how does this work? Um, AND it's, it caused
me to pause and think whether moral disgust was
indeed a primary domain, uh, or whether it was
derived. And so, It, it really went, I went
back to the drawing board, literally, because I, I
enjoy trying to map out the inputs and how
things get put together. You know, if you could
have a scheme schematic that you could hand over
to the MIT, you know, Imagineers to build it
into their, their robots, what would you give to
them? And when it came to morality, I had
nothing but vague kind of like magical like magic
happens here, who knows, and then this output of,
you know, punishment, uh, and so. Obviously, early researchers
identified that when people are asked to nominate what
disgusts them, a large swath of the items that
people will nominate have to do with morality, lying,
cheating, stealing, and so forth. Um, AND so it
would, of course, seem that this is one important
domain. How does it work? Well, my thinking was
that if we just change, if we can possibly
drop the term morality for a second, I can
let you think it, you can think it, but
I'm not gonna say it for a minute because
I'm gonna stay in more safe grounds here. It
seems as if disgust, what it does is it
updates our sense of social value of others. Um,
SO folks in the, in evolutionary psychology have come
up with a, uh, a term of art welfare
trade-off ratio that we generate a, an idea of
how much other people care for us, how willing
they are to trade off their, their welfare for
us. And we have an idea of how willing
we would be to trade off our welfare for
them. So we have a welfare trade-off ratio that
we can generate, uh, on the fly for any
given person in a, in a given context. And
we use this to guide our social interactions. And
so, I like to think about this as more
of a general social value, that for every person
that we interact with, we have a sense of
their social value. What's the expected value of interacting
with this person. Um, AND so, my question was,
does disgust influence our social value of other people?
And is that the way that it gets into
morality? So when you think about my, you know,
so Consumption, contact, and sexual psychologies, that all regulates
first person behavior. That's like what I want to
prefer, what I, you know, prefer to do and,
and, and have happen in my world. Um, HOW
does, how does that information, because if that was
it, disgust, you know, what disgusts me, that's it.
And there's, that's the end of the, the sentence.
There's a period and, and everyone else does what,
you know, why do I care what anyone else
does? And so the question is, does my assessment
of what other people are doing influence how I
perceive them? And I think the answer is yes.
And at least as it relates to disgust, because
I think other emotions are obviously going to be
involved in morality. Uh, BUT as it relates to
disgust, it looks as though People tend to evaluate
the foods other people eat. The matter and physical
world that people tend to contact and interact with,
and the sexual behavior of other people, that registers
in our mind as, you know, as having a
certain type of value. Think about it. If you
had someone eating your favorite meal and drinking your
favorite wine or whatever it is, You, that would
be your new best friend, right? So someone who
especially is really proficient at making these things and
procuring all these great things to eat. I mean,
this is someone you want to associate with often.
On the other hand, if someone's eating things that
you personally find foul, don't, doesn't taste well, for
whatever reason, a history of not knowing what it
is, um, and so not, not be, you know,
never having tasted it, or literally just doesn't taste
right to you. Uh, THESE are not people you're
not, you're gonna want to associate with. And so,
Just consumption can influence the value that we place
on the behavior of other people when it comes
to what they're eating. And you, you know, a
lot of food taboos, a lot of food laws
uh seem to, to take, to take advantage of,
of this. So If it's the case that what
you're eating influences my sense of your value to
me, that might be one way that suddenly now
disgust jumps the fence and goes now from personal
decisions to more social third party decisions as to
whether I want to interact with you. There's still
more to come in terms of how you get
to the, you know, maybe full-blown. Morality, sorts of
behavior, moral behaviors. But I think that's the first
step. The idea that what you're touching, what you're
eating, who you're having sex with, it registers to
me as, is this something that I find for
me, uh, something that is behavior that I would
engage in or I find of high value. Right?
So I think that's the first step there. And
you have cases where people who, you know, so
in India, the untouchable cast, it's literally untouchables, like
people who are seen as lower status, or they're
doing jobs that bring them more into contact with
contaminants. These are, these are things that cause them
to have a lower social value to an entire
society, potentially. Um, BUT people who eat particular types
of foods, people who engage in insects that you
wouldn't find necessarily attractive, That's, those are other reasons
why people might have lowered social value for different
groups. So that's kind of the first step in
as to how disgust starts to To color and
shade our social world in terms of things that
we, you know, people we prefer, people we, we
don't prefer to associate with. Um, BUT then the
question becomes, uh, if you want me to continue
on the story here, then the question becomes. Stop
me whenever you want. No, no problem. OK. How
is it that we get from, so, who cares,
right? So I see you eating. Um, THERE'S very
few foods that I actually don't really like, but
like, like parkle, which is, I think like fermented
shark. So forgive me if you've ever tasted this
and enjoy it, but that's the only type of
food that has almost really in a restaurant made
me just yuck, and so. Mm Why is it
that if I saw you eating fermented shark? Why
do I care? To me, I should say, you
eat it all, because the more you eat of
it, the more of the other good food that's
left for me. So, have at it and leave
all the good scrumptious stuff, uh, for me to
eat. So it would seem like it's almost strange,
right? So, disgust tells me, you know, OK, that's
not what I prefer, but if you prefer it,
hm, have at it. Who cares? So the real
question is, why do we care? Why not live
and let live? And so I think that in
order to get to the answer for that, you
have to think about a couple of different systems.
So leaving disgust behind for a second, um, Carlton
and I talked about in the book Objection, what
might happen. And so, and it was based on
a lot of thinking. I should also mention that
this wasn't at all, uh, original, uh, To us,
but we had used other sources and other people
who had really thought long and hard about this.
And this includes Lita Cosmides, John Touby in their
great paper Groups in Mind, but also Peter Dholi
and Rob Kurzban, who had written a lot about
morality too. So we were trying to come up
with a specific answer, and I, we came up
with the idea that, look, humans are concerned about
resources, right? So the ability to control resources would
have been very important, particularly to males. So to
the extent that females prefer males or prefer to
mate with males who have access to resources because
what limits a female's reproductive success. And the ability
for females to rear offspring, uh, at least ancestrally,
was her, her access to resources. So preferring males
who are capable of providing resources and defending them
would have been really important. And this has shaped
male psychology, of course. To want to acquire resources
and defend them. And so you have a lot
of uh intersexual sexual competition, males fighting for one
another, uh, in order to, uh, in order to
control resources and females are very sensitive to all
of this. So I don't think it's a um
I don't think it's controversial to say that males
seek resources, females prefer males with resources. So I
don't think that's going to get me in hot
water. I think later it gets me in hot
water. And so, um, so the, so if you
take that as a kind of a baseline condition
here. That sets the stage for being concerned about
who has access to resources and who is controlling
resources, because any resource that you have, I do
not. So it is a zero-sum psychology in, in
some sense. But if you couple that now with
the human, almost, it's not unique to humans, but
it's certainly we're certainly one of the very few
species that's capable of physically coordinating. So, so humans
now have the ability based on additional cognitive features
and adaptations that allow us to mentally and physically
coordinate with one another. Shifting the leverage of dyadic
interactions to multi-group interactions, such that, normally, if we're
in a context contest over resources, it's you and
I are going to meet, we're gonna see who's
bigger, who's stronger, who's healthier at the moment, who
can take who and who's gonna get the resources.
Um, AND so, you know, they'd go to you.
And so, uh, but they'll get come to me,
however, if I now meet you with a whole
bunch of my friends. And I don't mean little
kids. Right? But I mean people who could actually,
you know, really tilt the leverage in terms of
Uh, you know, and the, and the formidability in
my favor, and then I get all that. So
the ability for humans to form, uh, these coalitions
would have shifted the way that resources, uh, were,
were allocated. And so with that in mind, males
who have a sensitivity to resource, the resource allocation
of structure in the environment, who has what, uh,
and then the ability to form these coalitions in
order to ensure that they have the one, they're
the ones who get the Uh, resources and outcompete
others. Suddenly now you have that type of psychology.
Thinking about, well, who is worth competing against in
order to ensure that I have more resources? Are
you going to fight to the death your kids
for resources or friends, or, you know, tight cooperators?
Of course not, right? These are people who have
fitness value in other in other ways. And so,
uh, and I should say, you're not thinking about
this consciously, right? So the idea that I feed
my child is not because I'm consciously thinking, hey,
you're Are, you know, you're, you're related to me.
R 0.5, have, have like, you know, this amount
of food today. I know. I just, I love
him. I want him to do well, and I
feed him. And so, uh, so I'm really talking
about the logic as to how these systems, uh,
why these systems might be the way they are
and sensitive to the information that they are, not
necessarily our, our explicit motivations. And so, But the
idea that we form coalitions and sensitive to resources
suddenly means now we, you know, we might be
surveying the landscape of social groups to determine who
might be in my best interest to prevent From
getting access to resources. Um, IS it a pretty
psychology? No, I don't think it is. But I
think that we have a taste for identifying groups
that are low leveraged and going after them to
marginalize them or exploit them. And so the real
question now is, well, who, who do we go
after? Um, And I think that's where emotions like
disgust come into play, because disgust is one emotion
that informs our value of other people, right? So
if you find a group of people, it, it,
it just generates disgust in what they're eating, what
they're touching, who they're having sex with, then it
just puts it out there for other systems to
say, if I'm searching for a group to go
after, this is, it would make sense to go
after folks like this, not people I value and
want to keep around. So, again, it's, it's not
a, this isn't the, the sunny sunny side of
human nature. It's very much the dark side. But
I think it's one that's important to understand and,
and, and know about because it informs why we
might think, think and try to coordinate other people
against other groups using sometimes the language of morality.
So, um, so I guess that's, that's, that's. Where
I want to kind of draw the line in
terms of how far I'm willing to go here,
but the idea that disgust informs the social value
of others, kind of putting it, uh, you know,
flagging it to other systems that might be ready
to form coalitions to exploit marginalized low leverage groups.
OK, but then at what point, if there's a
specific point, of course, does such a thing as
moral condemnation come online?
I think that, so if, if you cross out
the word moral for a second, cause you'll see
that it, it almost doesn't add much. So, uh,
but when does condemnation come online? I think condemnation
comes online when you start to have a group
of people who can come together and mentally and
physically coordinated that this is a group. That should
be marginalized and prevented from acquiring and controlling resources.
So, um, you know, I, this is in stark
contrast to, so this will open up a can
of worms. So stark contrast to the idea that
morality, morality is cooperation. So it's, it's often thought
that morality is this wonderful This wonderful world of
cooperation. And I just question whether all of it
is. I think that's perhaps the best way of
saying it. It seems to me that cooperation looks
different than some of the things that I see
coming out of the, the moral sphere. For instance,
um, laws against homosexuality, they, they're quickly disappearing. But
at one point in time, there were, there were
pretty harsh laws against, and in some parts of
the world, they're still there, pretty harsh uh laws
um against homosexual homosexuality. And the question I have
is, why? Why care? So, theoretically, one hypothesis could
be, if you're a heterosexual male, and that there
are a whole bunch of other men who are,
um, basically taking themselves, self-selecting out of the mating
pool, right? They're saying, I'm not interested in women.
And so that leaves for heterosexual men, far more
women. Uh, uh, A far more target rich environment
for them, right? And so the idea that, you
know, why aren't heterosexual men Championing, championing and celebrating.
Gay men, right? Why aren't there parades, annual parades
thrown by heterosexual men? Like, that, that are just,
you know, celebrating the range of, uh, of sexualities.
And you just don't see that. And the question
is, why? Cause from on one hypothesis, again, maybe
you can easily debunk it and, and, and shoot
plenty of holes in it. But on one hypothesis,
you know, to the extent Men are not interested
in women, that leaves far more, you know, women
for the heterosexual men who are there. Wouldn't that
be of benefit? Why not see that as a
benefit? Why not try to turn all men gay?
Right? So, I mean, that would be in one
universe, one possible set of behaviors, right? So the
question is, why we're not in that universe, so
what can we infer from that? And so, um,
the story that I have put together about if
heterosexual men find homosexuality disgusting, this puts it very
low on the social value scale, and therefore, potentially,
at least at one point in time, made this
group of individuals when they appeared to be low
leveraged, by which I mean a uh a minority,
um, in the sense of numbers. Uh, MADE them
easy targets. But now, in today's world, you know,
you see numbers growing and growing and growing, and
perhaps to our psychology, it suggests that, hey, listen,
this is not a low leveraged group. This is
a high leveraged group and quite formidable, and therefore,
it actually would be too costly to try and
fight, uh, in, in that. Same way. And so,
perhaps this is one reason why you have seen
laws and morality kind of change, uh, very quickly,
um, to, to these types of groups. But now
there's other types of sexual groups that are suffering
the same kind of faiths that, that, you know,
that gays and lesbians had been, had been suffering
for quite some time. So it's a very interesting,
it's a very interesting dynamic, I think. But my
sense is that disgust is informing our social value,
which is informing. Our sense of what groups do
we or can we target.
OK, so trying to avoid the word moral here,
let's talk about, let's talk about just social condemnation.
So how do we go, how do we go
from emotions and social condemnation to something like social
norms and then laws?
Well, I think that once you have, so it's
a really good question. I don't even pretend to
have all the answers here, but I would say
that once you have a group of people who
are interested in Controlling resources and targeting a particular
group for whatever reason. It creates a really interesting
landscape. Uh, WELL, this is kind of to your
question, but I'll get more directly to your question
in a second. But it creates a landscape, uh,
for individuals very quickly, right? It's almost self-reinforcing. So
as soon as you're an individual and you come
into this world and you say, oh my gosh,
look at these coalitions, and look what they're saying
is disgusting and worth uh condemning, well, you know,
If it's a behavior that I that I like.
So I happen to enjoy foie gras. California made
foie gras illegal at some point. And so, um,
you know, but as someone, you know, would I
hold a banner, you know, walking in, you know,
down, downtown LA or in San Francisco saying, you
know, give me your foie gras, you know, foie
gras lover here. Um, YOU know, that would be
quite dangerous. Um, AND so. The idea that once
you understand the norms and the groups that are
out there and what they condemn, you have to
kind of be very careful about the types of
behaviors that you engage in, and you could actually
use disgust to identify, say, listen, you know, I,
I'm not on the wrong side of this issue
or this behavior. Take your sights off of me.
I'm not someone you want to condemn. Try and
find somebody else. So I think that that's almost
self-reinforcing, right? The idea, it's reinforcing the norm because
you want to make sure, even if, you know,
you, you loved foie gras and you were part
of the council that, you know, that, that Made
it illegal at some point, um, you would perhaps
be very concerned about, uh, voicing all of that.
And this should sound familiar, because this has to
do with the ASH study, right? The idea that
conformity is really important, especially when you're in a
group. And what's scary is that Ash found that
people are nervous about disagreeing with a group over
line lengths. Like, what is, I mean, a species
that's concerned about disagreeing and going against 6 other
people, or however many other people. To disagree about
the perceptual facts of line lengths tells me, yeah,
there's probably little hope about going against other sorts
of norms that have a lot more, you know,
at stake here. So, uh, but certainly knowing about
this process. Might, might help. And certainly knowing that
having one other person in the room helps uh
embolden people to, to kind of go against uh
groups, so that kind of sense of increasing leverage
as you start to enter into these group dynamics.
But in any case, How does condemnation start to
get into law? Sometimes it does and sometimes it
doesn't. It's a matter of kind of how much
of a fervor is whipped up to, you know,
to get people all excited about passing a law.
And so, I think that there are multiple reasons
why the laws we have exist. One of, I
mean, I like to think about very extreme cases.
And so, one of the extreme cases that you
could think about is, if, I mean, right now,
so killing people, eating them, these aren't things that,
you know, these are, they're good laws against this.
And so I like these laws very much. But
I'm not a psychopath, right? If I were a
psychopath and I was a cannibal, or so forth,
I would see these as an infringement on my
desires, the things that I would like to do
with my life. And so, you could imagine a
bunch of psychopaths in, in, uh, in control, right?
A bunch of psychopaths making the laws. And what
kind of laws then would you would expect, right?
And so, would you expect the same group of
laws, or would it be OK to go after
someone? Would it be OK to, you know, to
form a coalition and intentionally, you know, deceive, lie,
and gas light, all this different, right? I mean,
what would be What would be the laws if,
uh, psycho psychopathy were the majority? But pick any
other type of behavior, right? So if OCD was
the norm, right? And so suddenly now, you know,
gloves, everyone would have to wear gloves in society,
right? I mean, you could imagine such things. And
so, How do things get from, you know, preferences
to third party regulation to laws? And I think
there's quite a road and things have to travel.
But I do believe one of those roads to
that endpoint is discussed how we value things, and
the extent to which you can get other people
to agree, right? So, um, getting other people. On
board with certain projects is going to be critical
as to whether or not you can get other
people to actually start enacting laws and uh have
the, you know, more systematic punishment and condemnation using
all of the power of the state. So it's,
it, I think it, things do happen that way.
It is, it is more rare and it tends
to be the things that on which we, the
majority agrees.
Mhm. So just to illustrate, uh, some of what
we've been talking about and and also keeping in
mind all of these intermediary steps from an emotion
like these guests to laws. Uh, COULD you give
us perhaps a couple of examples, one or two
examples of how these guest manifests in terms of
law?
I, yeah, I gave you one. I mean, the
laws against homosexuality were are one of them, right,
very clearly, um, and so, uh, you have, you
know, so some of the food laws that you
find overseas might reflect some of the religious. Rules
about what's considered disgusting, uh, and, and for different
reasons that prevent not only the person, you know,
but whoever's in that society from consuming, uh, those
particular foods. So I think, uh, when it comes
to disgust, the The Many of the things Items
that are prohibited. In law that relate to disgust
will tend to be the food contact and sex.
So that's, that's what I would suggest is, you
know, anywhere you see, you know, things about consumption,
things about, not all things, but disgust will be
among, uh, the good candidates for why those ended
up there about consumption, contact, and sex. Uh, AND
so those are the ones that are kind of
Originating potentially from a discussed psychology. And then the
question is, you know, what is the role of
disgust in law? Ought it be present? Should we
be evaluating some of our laws as to why
it is we forbid certain acts if it has
to do with consumption, contact, and sex? And so
that's, those are additional questions. Some people, um, so
Leon Cass was one who said that, you know,
disgust is a good compass as to what should
be, you know, prohibited. Uh, BUT other folks, you
know, Martha Nussbaum included, was very wary about, you
know, having discussed pres present in the law, and
I, um, I too am concerned about having discussed
present in the law only because if, if they
if. If any of what I've just talked about
has a hint of truth to it and ends
up being correct as to what disgust is, how
it informs our social value, and how that might
influence, uh, our group dynamics and what we want
to go after and how that's codified in law,
then we might want to rethink it. Um, AND
so, I mean, it's, these are some really good
questions that you can ask your philosophers that you
have.
Yeah, I was going to say that, that perhaps
this kind of discussion as to, to what extent
perhaps we should extract the things that our laws
that derived from these guests at their bases from,
uh, the code from the legal code, uh, to
what extent we should remove them from their, I
mean, that, that's some. I think that perhaps it's
better to discuss with maybe legal or moral philosophers
and legal scholars. But, I mean, perhaps there's another
kind of question that I could ask you. Do
you think that evolutionary psychology, science, more broadly itself
can inform these kinds of more ethical discussions?
I do. I do. To the extent that ethics
relates to humans and their brains and how they
behave, then understanding humans and how they behave and,
and the evolved adaptations, uh, that we all come
equipped with, uh, I think that would be important
to understanding ethics, for sure. So I I think
that Whereas you'll never bridge completely an is from
an ought, right? An ought from an is. The
idea that we might want and find that we
should have particular types of laws for particular reasons,
that, that might not have anything to do with
our evolved psychology, right? We might actually identify what
is and say, it therefore is incredibly something that
we want to make sure isn't uh present in
our, in our laws and our, our moral moral
code. But I think a first step is understanding
who we are, right? So if you do want
to guide behavior, you do want to change behavior,
you do want to make people um more cooperative
and have societies that work far better together and
with each other. Understanding, you know, these evolved adaptations,
I think is critical, uh, only because it's at
least good to know. What you're fighting against potentially,
and what you're fighting with. Uh, AND, you know,
what, what's going to be aiding you in the
ability to, to shape human behavior, uh, in more
successful ways. And so, but obviously, defining success is,
is not unproblematic, um, but just using the word
harmonious, I think gets me out of trouble. But
again, understanding evolved psychology, I think it's critical to
any enterprise that's trying to understand ethics and morality.
Great. So let's move on to another kind of
emotion now. What is gratitude? That was tough.
So.
What is gratitude and what situations elicit gratitude?
OK. Whew. I'm glad we're not, this is good.
OK, so gratitude. Thank you for starting this. So,
gratitude is an interesting emotion and for researchers of
emotions, they will remember that there's this set of
universal emotions that we were all taught about and
gratitude doesn't show up on this list, right? It's
It's not an emotion that people typically talk about,
uh, when it comes to what are the, you
know, the standard, you know, the standard operating equipment
of all, of all humans. Usually, gratitude is left
off the list of, of universal emotions. Uh, BUT
I think erroneously. So much like anger, gratitude should
be up there. And, um, the question I ask
people when I start talking about gratitude is what
would be lost if we didn't have any gratitude?
If you just pluck that little system right out
of our brain. And nobody, there was no sense
of gratitude, no thank you, no anything. What would
be lost. And so, if you think about it,
I mean, it, it's it would be, it would
be a pretty big hole in our social interactions
if there was no gratitude, you know, someone holds
a door for you and no thank you, although
this is South Florida. That happens often. Uh, BUT
you know, someone hands you money or someone picks
up your wallet and returns it to you, and,
you know, the person didn't say thank you. You
know, you're, you're fed something and or whatever, someone
helps you and saves your life, no thank you.
Um, AND so, what would be lost? It would
seem that The key feature that would be lost
is opportunities to form a bond with that other
person, right? To be able to continue that interaction
into the future. Gratitude is an emotion that appears
to be a positive reinforcement of the benefits other
people have on offer. So if you do something
nice for me, my gratitude is basically saying, hey,
that action that you there just did, I found
to be of benefit. And boy, golly, it would
be great if you were to continue doing those,
those kinds of things again into the future, um.
With the promise that I might be willing to
repay that down the line. And so it, it
is it is a bid for a cooperative relationship,
one that can grow into this mutually valued kind
of snowball into these very deep engagements, uh, that
John Toy and Leda Cosmides have talked about in
the evolution of, of friendships. And so, but gratitude
is one of the starting points for that. I
don't know that it is the only starting point
for that, uh, because I can get you to
be nice to me. Through threat of, you know,
injury. Like I can say, if you're not nice
to me, if you don't cooperate with me from
here on out, you know, I can, I can
act like the mafia, and I can just be
like, I'm gonna take you out. I'm gonna, you
know, bash your knees in. And so, I, I
mean, I could do these kinds of things, uh,
and ensure that you are going to be nice
to me and cooperate with whomever I, I say.
Uh, BUT one way to do that outside of
dominance, if I'm not dominant, and I have to
try and get other ways to get people to
cooperate is to get you to value the qualities
that I have that you might find a benefit,
and that we can kind of find some type
of mutual, uh, engagement in, in that way. And
so gratitude can jumpstart this. So you do something,
you Ricardo, going about your day, or doing the
things that you just enjoy. But some of those
things I might find a benefit in my world.
So let's just say you are, you know, we're
neighbors and you're neat, and you like to pick
up the garbage from your front lawn and make
sure that, you know, everything is tidy and there's
no weeds and then there's no animals feeding on
your lawn, and it's, it's all very nice and
tidy. I appreciate that. And so to the extent
that I said, Hey, thanks for doing all that.
I think you do a great job. I'm actually
sending a signal of, I value you for this,
right? And so, it's You wouldn't be cheating, or,
uh, you wouldn't be engaging in any cheating in
any reciprocal altruism kind of way if you didn't
return the favor, or if you started growing weeds.
And so, you're not cheating. All, all it is
is my signal to you is, I value you
for this. What hopefully that does in your brain
is, huh, that values me for this kind of
behavior. Um, OUT of the other people in my
world, that's kind of like an interesting indication that
she among everyone. KIND of values me and likes
having me around in this local environment. It would
be well worth my while potentially to make sure
that she sticks around, you know, valuing me. So
you can value me for valuing you. And so,
again, I don't think it registers like this. It's
just a sense of liking. Like, oh, she said
something that made me feel good. Um, I like
her. And so I want to make sure that,
you know, oh, her mail, her paper was on
her front door, or her lawn. Let me bring
that up to her door for her. And so
you can have Uh, very interesting initiation of, of
favors or exchanges that are just based on the
idea that I value you for the unique attributes
and things that you do. But gratitude is one
way for this to all get jumpstarted. And so
I've worked with uh a bunch of folks, so
Mike McCullough, uh, Adam Smith, Eric Peterson, Danny Forster
on gratitude. Um, AND we've identified that gratitude is
very similar to anger in a lot of respects,
just the opposite. Um, AND so with Joseph Billingsley,
one of my former students, we were trying to
determine whether or not anger, so Aaron Cell, you've
probably talked to on this program, and so he
has done a lot of great work, uh, with
anger. Have you talked to him yet?
Yeah, yes, yes, I have. Yeah.
So he, um, he's talked about the architecture of
anger. And it looks like anger occurs when someone
has not valued your welfare as high as you
expect them to, right? So, you do something bad
to me, and I thought that you should have
treated me better. My anger is, you know, is
a Function of how poorly you treated me compared
to how much I expected. And it functions to
basically reach into your brain and say, hey, that
dial of value, social value, you might want to
increase it a little bit more for me. Otherwise,
there might be a cost coming your way for
not doing so. And so gratitude, it seems like.
It is similar in the sense of it notices
not decrements in value. It notices increases in value.
So if I determine that, you know, you're strangers,
why should you value me, but suddenly you do
something really nice for me, that registers as an
increased signal of, hey, this person values me, and
that's what triggers seems to trigger gratitude. That you
are over, not overvaluing me, you are valuing my
welfare more than I thought. Um, AND so this
is something to reinforce positively rather than anger and
reinforcing it negatively. So it looks like that's what,
uh, gratitude responds to.
Do you think that an emotion like gratitude would
connect to an evolutionary mechanism such as reciprocal altruism
in any way?
I do. I think that um I think it
can. When you go, so reciprocal altruism, just, you
know, social exchange that we tend to see in
a standard format. If you have a particular grocery
store, or, you know, you go to Starbucks and
there's a particular person behind the, you know, the
your barrister of, you know, choice here, you know,
you see them, you engage in a social exchange,
you know, give me my latte, I'll give you
my money. Um, BUT the thing is, is that
you can now, and, and as an exchange, it
might be just a one-off, and then you're done,
right? So it's a win-win situation, and then there
you both go on, on your merry way. Uh,
BUT the thing is, I can value you for
the way that you make my latte, or the
smile, or the other kinds of things that kind
of come along, or you're always open, you're open
at the time, like, so there's additional things that
I can value this exchange for. And I, and
that's a way to, to start to cultivate value.
So even anonymous interactions on the web and exchange
and, you know, e-commerce, I can prefer and start
to derive value from a particular company because of
their Customer service because of the, the way that
they are so responsive to my questions or how,
how good their products are at the price and
so forth. So outside of an exchange, which is
really just a, you know, tit for tat kind
of exchange in the moment. If I, I can
start to value the person who is the source
of that supply, um, and want to keep them
around, and I think that's where you start to
get into, uh, you know, it's the gratitude, right?
Because think about it. If, if I, if you
cheat me, that's anger, right? Or if you, if,
if my latte is cold or the cup is
like has a hole in it, the lids leak.
You know, name any type of thing that tends
to happen, like, that gets you angry, right? Versus,
you know, the absence of all those things, even
just the absence of all those things these days
can cause gratitude. Like, oh, thank God this place
knows how to put a lid on a cup.
And so you can value anyone for anything. And
so gratitude absolutely can reinforce these social exchanges. I
think that we have a psychology, so Leda Cosmides
has done a lot, obviously, in, in social exchange
and showing that we're very sensitive to cheater, cheater
detection, and so forth. And I think that, you
know, within, um, you know, just that type of
interaction doesn't require any gratitude, right? Oh, I mean,
I don't think it requires any gratitude, but now
you're going to make me think about that, because
the idea is that to the extent that you
and I come, you know, face to face, ready
to exchange something. The idea that you are not
hitting me on the head or shooting me dead
to take whatever it is I have on offer.
I kind of like you now, right? So the
idea is, you're willing to even engage in exchange.
So whether, so whether or not that rises to
the, the visceral, you know, the quality of like
gratitude and my, my feeling of strong indebtedness, I
don't think it should necessarily. But no doubt, it,
it certainly marks you as someone of higher social
value, didn't kill me. Like, don't, don't ever underestimate
the fact that we're tracking the things that don't
happen. And as much as the, as we're tracking
the things that do happen. But a social exchange
requires people to have restraint, right? And so, to
the extent that that is the case, there's already
a maybe a gratitude kind of implicit or a
value there, uh, because you're already showing me that
you value me greater than a mortal enemy. So
I, I don't know, you, you raised a good
question. I'll think about it. Uh, BUT I do
obviously think that gratitude is tied to social exchange,
either initially, uh, like I just mentioned, or certainly
as it can snowball, uh, later on.
And what is interpersonal valuation and how does it
tie to gratitude?
Well, I, I, so that's the social value that
I talk about, right? So you know, how do
you, um, sorry, I use multiple terms, so inter
interpersonal valuation, um, that's journal speak, um, so I
would say that, you know, When I assess how
much you socially value me. So when we meet,
if I didn't, if I didn't know you and
we just met on the street, I might have
a baseline expectation of how you should treat me.
I might have a baseline expectation of how everybody
should be treating me, right? And so, as you
know, I'm sure you know people, some people walk
in the room and they feel like everyone should
be treating me well. And if you fall below
that mark, you're not gonna get gratitude. You're gonna
get some kind of anger, whether it's kind of
a, an overt aggression or a passive aggression. But
then there are some people who have very low
self-esteem and feel like they shouldn't be treated well
at all. So anyone who's nice to them, you
know, and so forth. So we're all different in
our settings, and we're also all different in the
types of relationships that we have. So, I would
say social valuation or interpersonal valuation is associated with
gratitude in the sense that If I have a
prior value for how I expect you to treat
me. Then any action that you engage in towards
me, and any, believe it or not, any lack
of action. So, you're either working for me full
time or not. And so, I mean, right now,
Ricardo, you could be. Ordering my groceries, right? You
could be, uh, you know, you could be doing
all sorts of things for me. You're not doing
them. And the idea is, I know that, right?
But the thing is everyone's not doing that for
me, so it doesn't really register. But if I
expected you to be going above and beyond, that
might make me very angry that you're not kind
of doing all the tasks that I have to
do today for me right now, as I expect.
And so, the point is, is that I think
we, we all have a very different level of
expectation of other people. But we take Actions that
people engage in, but the lack of actions as
well sometimes, to indicate how another person is evaluating
us and treating us, regarding us in the moment.
And if it comes in as higher than we
expect, then that activates and prompts typically gratitude to
the extent that this is someone you value and
wish to kind of continue on in this cooperative
relationship with. Um, AND if it comes in lower,
this could activate anger in the sense of trying
to get the person to value you a little
bit more. So gratitude very much, uh, is regulated
by incoming information about how people value you. Mhm.
So, perhaps, I would like to change topics now
again. I think that we've already talked about the
main things associated with gratitude. So we've also done
work on tears. Uh, FIRST of all, how do
you approach such a topic tears from an evolutionary
perspective?
Well, As, uh, in my role as editor in
chief of evolution and human behavior, I got a
paper on tears from Amir uh Grassman, and he
had a great paper talked about. How tears uh
affect perception of different emotions in different contexts. And
I was reading through this paper, and it dawned
on me that there really wasn't a satisfying evolutionary
explanation of tears. Tears seemed to do something socially.
And a lot of evolutionary psychologists, um, who you've
interviewed on your program have talked a lot about
this welfare trade-off ratio, the idea that, you know,
and what I'm calling social value or interpersonal valuation.
And it seems to me that tears must be
part of the story about social value as to
how we regulate our social value of others and
how we use tears to regulate others' social value
of us, um, and how they, they value us.
And so together, Amir, Dan, uh, Sneezer and I
started to think about what are these tears, um,
what is going on here? And it looks like
tears are one way, one communicative method of, of
establishing and signaling value. Value of any sort of
action or a piece of matter or a person,
what have you. And so, Tears allow us to
communicate positive value and negative value. They are similar
to shouting or screaming, or just raising the voice
in in any, any other type of, of way.
It's a mechanism that illustrates amplitude. So, I can
indicate to you the value I place on a
particular act that you are. Um, THAT you are
engaged in that is targeting me, I can use
my tears to illustrate to you how much I
value that particular act. Again, positively or negatively, right?
So if it's an incredible act of kindness, right?
And so you've just given me, you know, your,
your, your fortune, right? So that, that might kind
of elicit tears, um, or you've, uh, you've, you
know, stayed my execution, you've prevented, you know, you're
no longer going to, you know, You're no longer
gonna hang me. Like, I, I might also show,
you know, cry tears of joy, or, you know,
intense love or intense pride. These kinds of things,
tears can signal the intensity of the value of
a particular act. Uh, POSITIVE, and then, of course,
negatively. And It is a strategy that all can
use. Uh, SOME people use it intentionally and explicitly,
um, so with crocodile tears and being able to
manipulate people, but for the most part, most people
don't use them in those ways, um, and, uh,
use them to communicate. To communicate value of some
sort. And so, this is the kind of research
that I've been engaged in with, with Daniel and
Amir, and we have indeed found that tears are
associated with the intensity of the benefit conferred or
or cost imposed, uh, by a particular person. So
that's additional, uh, new work. But tears are a
very interesting communicative device. I mean, obviously there's tears
that protect the eye that lubricate the The eye
to make sure that uh the optics all work
well, but it's also, you know, evolved the secondary
function of being used to communicate the intensity of
value perceived. Mhm.
Uh, SO, and those are their functions, the functions
of emotional tears, correct?
That's what we're proposing. So I think far more
research is required, but, you know, that's the, the
path where we're plotting down. Um, AND so the
question would then be, you know, can we test
it? Who cries? Because tears would seem to be,
uh, Tears would seem to be a strategy that
could be used by people with lower leverage, right?
So the idea that you have, who tends to
cry in situations. Well, in interactions and in conflict
between men and women, women tend to cry. Between
adults and children, children tend to cry, not all
the time, but just the tendency. And the question
is, why isn't it the opposite? Right? So what's
going on here? And it seems to suggest that
for Ability and leverage are part of the equation
is to determine, uh, who, who uses tiers and
when they use tiers, uh, as a communicative signal
and ability to manipulate other people into either continuing
the benefits that they're delivering or halting the costs
that they're imposing.
And uh I mean, and this I think will
be my last question. So how do tears connect
to emotional expression and do they connect or tie
to specific emotions?
So, uh, so I haven't been the one to
do this research, as Mirra, one of our co-authors
on this paper has. And, uh, my understanding is
that tears help kind of identify and accentuate the
emotion that's being perceived. But I would say tears
only really arise in these social emotions. And so,
one of the examples that I've used to kind
of find the boundaries, so one of the things
I like to do is think about boundary conditions
when something holds, but more importantly, when it doesn't
hold. And so the hypothesis that tears are this
communicative, uh, uh, device that can relay value to
another agent, then you shouldn't see tears where there
are no agents. Um, AND so, you know, I
have a hamburger in front of me, and, you
know, I see. A bug on it, or I
see maggots crawl out of it or something really
gross, like, I'm not gonna cry. Like, I will,
I mean, I will cry to the extent that
there's another person around who I can communicate the
value of this burger to. Um, BUT I am
not crying for the purpose of communicating to the
burger. Like, you're not treating me well. Like, it's
not, so it's not a pathogen disgust kind of
emotion. But I would say it is a sexual,
like, it can actually apply to other realms of
disgust that bring in other agents, other people who
could improve your life, um, for sure. And so,
that's, so that's what I, I, I would, would
suggest is that tears are very much a social
emotion. They aren't necessarily activated. In response to non-agents.
Now, if someone is crying in response to a
non-agent, I, my hypothesis would be they're thinking about
someone, right? There's someone in their mind that they're
crying to, uh, and so forth, but it's not
the actual stimulus of, of, um, uh, of a
physical, like a tree branch isn't gonna make me
cry, right? And so pain might make me cry,
uh, in order to signal, but usually I won't
cry until there are other people around to actually,
you know, hear that signal. Um, SO, uh, in
any case, I think tears are very much tied
to our social, um, our social psychology and how
we get along with other people and how we,
how we manage the cooperative relationships that we have.
Uh, BUT I'm in tears, they do not always
serve a social signaling function, right? Because sometimes we
just cry alone and, and sometimes we even want
to avoid that other people see us crying,
right? Yes. So I think that is, those are
also really interesting features of the entire system. Like,
because crying would suggest that I'm low leveraged, right?
So that I, I like my tears, and so
it's like, don't see me cry, right? So, because
I don't want to put out that I'm someone
who's easily, you know, overpowered or, you know, less
formidable potentially. That would be a really bad signal
to put out there, uh, unnecessarily. Um, AND so,
I, I do find that very interesting. But your
question of, you know, tears are for signaling, so
people can cry alone. But I also think that
our ability to simulate events and simulate, you know,
bring up memories of people. I mean, that's one
reason. So, listen, as an evolved adaptation, there's going
to be the functional response of it in the
situation. For which it evolved. And then there's going
to be all of these other reasons why, um,
why you might find tearing a curve, right? So,
I mean, you find this with all sorts of
adaptations, like we evolved to be upright, you know,
and walk bipedally and have balance. And so that
explains a lot of our walking, but it doesn't
necessarily, it explains why we can skateboard and surf
and do all. Sorts of other interesting things, but
we didn't evolve to do those sorts of things,
but now are part of the repertoire of things
we can do given this adaptation. So I think
that identifying the things for which this adaptation evolved
is, is important and obviously part of the science
and part of the the research that's required, uh,
and then identifying the things that it can do
by virtue of the fact that it's here.
Right, so, I mean, is there anything else about
gratitude or tears that I might have missed that
you would like to have just before we go,
or?
Um, That's a good question. I'm sure there is,
but right now, I think I'm just gonna say
that, uh, you know, a lot of these emotions
that I've been dealing with really do have a
lot to do with the rest of the research
that's coming out of evolutionary psychology on, on social
value. And I think it's important to understand for
all people interested in, you know, who we are
as a species and, and how the mind works,
um, so that we can, like I said, hopefully,
Hopefully enjoy far greater cooperative relationships and, you know,
quality of life. So, yeah, I think I'll just
in there.
Yeah, let's send on that note. So just before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Um, RIGHT now, the University of Miami website is
the best place to, the best place to find
me, um, and also it's a good email to
reach me at my miami.edu address. Uh, BUT other,
other than that, no, just, uh, publications, Google.
OK, great. So, Doctor Lieberman, thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been fun and it's been a very fun
and informative conversation.
So, Thanks, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andrerancis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun Macha
Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark
Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan Wilson,
asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poultonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon
Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.